FR #962: Adding Correction Handling Examples (#1434)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/appendix/correction_handling_examples/closed_billing_period.md

Reviewer: @ijurica 
I believe now is the time for you to convert your examples into actual CSVs in the PR itself.

These examples deserve a close read and comparison against the correction handling requirements introduced in #1501 -- and I have been using AI assistance to perform this reconciliation to good effect.  However, the AI-assisted process I now use cannot perform that comparison against data that's not actually in the branch/PR itself.

I know that we have loosely discussed postponing this conversion until consistency review.  But given my current process, and given the quality of reviews it has generated for other PRs, I will have to ask you to perform the revision now.  I will not approve this PR until I have been able to perform an AI-assisted review of your PR.

If you are not able to do so, please let me know, and I will step in to help.

## Closed-Period Correction Scenarios

All scenarios in this section relate to a closed billing period for which the corresponding invoices have already been issued. In the example scenarios presented below, this corresponds specifically to the May 2025 billing period, which was closed on June 16th, 2025. All described discrepancies were identified and addressed on July 12th, 2025, at which time the subsequent June 2025 billing period was still open.

In accordance with the requirements outlined in the Correction Handling attribute, the corresponding corrections are associated with that open billing period (refer to BillingPeriodStart and BillingPeriodEnd), with ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating they reconcile cost or usage from a previously closed billing period, while the charge period (ChargePeriodStart and ChargePeriodEnd) reflects when the cost or usage was originally incurred. This approach ensures a clear temporal separation between closed and open billing cycles, preserving transparency for closed billing periods and enabling traceable corrections in subsequent ones.

> The permissibility of delivery mechanisms depends on whether the correction affects invoice reconciliation for issued invoices or would require issuing additional invoices for the closed billing period. While the Overwrite delivery mechanism (i.e., Replacement correction style) could be applied if a correction does not impact invoice reconciliation or require additional invoices for the closed billing period, ACME Corp (acting as both the data generator and invoice issuer) generally chooses the Append delivery mechanism (i.e., Delta and Ledger correction styles) when delivering corrections to closed billing periods. This preference ensures consistency with auditability and traceability requirements, taking into account downstream processes, in particular chargeback, which relies on timely and accurate cost attribution.

Reviewer: Rephrased for readability.  I also suggest you change the date of action from **July 12th** to **July 5th**.  It is pretty uncommon in my experience for a service provider's billing period to still be open 12 days later, so I think using July 12th may actually introduce confusion.

Please feel free to add back whatever you think is missing, but I think these sections read more clearly now.

```suggestion
## Closed Period Correction Scenarios

These scenarios address discrepancies found in the May 2025 billing period after it was closed and invoiced by the issuer ACME Corp on June 16th, 2025. The discrepancies were identified on July 5th, 2025, during the open June 2025 billing cycle.

### Column Mapping

Corrections are applied to the open billing period rather than modifying the closed one. The ChargeClass is set to "Correction," and the BillingPeriodStart/End reflect the current open period (June). However, the ChargePeriodStart/End remain mapped to the original timeframe (May) to preserve the historical accuracy of when the cost was incurred.

### Correction Style

While the Overwrite mechanism is permissible when it doesn't impact issued invoices, ACME Corp defaults to the Append mechanism (Delta and Ledger styles) for all closed period corrections. This preference prioritizes auditability and traceability, ensuring that downstream consumers -- particularly those managing chargeback -- receive a clear, additive history of changes.
```

# Corrections to Closed Billing Period

The following examples illustrate how corrections to previously closed billing periods may be represented in FOCUS Cost and Usage dataset artifacts, using delivery mechanisms and correction styles that preserve invoice integrity and auditability.

> ## Closed-Period Correction Scenarios

Reviewer: Establish the situation at this stage and then use it for all the scenarios.  Establish the invoice issuer and the customer, the date, the billing periods, the status of the billing periods, and any helpful visuals.

Reviewer: Discussed in Feb 24 TF-1.  I will leave a suggestion on how to revise this further.

Reviewer: Resolving in favor of [this comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1434/files#r2848699947).

### Scenario 1: Closed-Period Correction - Partial Reallocation to Correct Resource

On July 12th, 2025, ACME Corp identified that a charge record previously invoiced for May 2025 was incorrectly attributed entirely to ResourceId `R-111`. In reality, only part of the cost and usage belonged to that resource, while the remainder pertained to ResourceId `R-222`.

To correct this misattribution, ACME Corp provisioned a reallocation correction using Append mechanisms. The correction was realized either through a Delta style correction, which redistributed the cost between resources using increment and decrement records, or through a Ledger style correction, which negated the original charge and introduced corrected records for each resource.

> Correction records were assigned to the next open billing period, with the charge period reflecting when the cost was originally incurred. This approach ensured a clear temporal separation between closed and open billing cycles, preserving transparency for closed billing periods and enabling traceable corrections in subsequent ones.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to make this more explicit:

Correction records were assigned BillingPeriodStart/BillingPeriodEnd values in the next open billing period, while ChargePeriodStart/ChargePeriodEnd continued to reflect when the cost was originally incurred.

Author: I have accepted the suggestion and, in the intro section for Closed-Period Correction Scenarios, I explicitly highlighted the columns that reflect the billing period, as follows:

> The corresponding corrections are associated with that open billing period (refer to BillingPeriodStart and BillingPeriodEnd), with ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating they reconcile cost or usage from a previously closed billing period, while the charge period (ChargePeriodStart and ChargePeriodEnd) reflects when the cost or usage was originally incurred.

Reviewer: @caligo-erik Please review and confirm whether we can close.

CSV Examples:

> * [Original Dataset Artifact](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UDZCxPqUNEUQt90h8sW-YuhgBsk4pHYcwRlgPJVmwPo/edit?gid=620136225#gid=620136225)

Reviewer 2: @ijurica these links are all the same

Author: Links to the CSV examples currently point to [Google Spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UDZCxPqUNEUQt90h8sW-YuhgBsk4pHYcwRlgPJVmwPo/edit?gid=620136225#gid=620136225) containing the sample dataset artifacts (charge records) in the corresponding sheets. At the consistency review stage, at latest, these will be converted to CSV files and added to the appropriate subfolder under `../specification/data`.

*Note: I am also adding this note in the PR description.*

Reviewer: @ijurica Please leave a comment on our AI #1878 that we need to address during consistency review.  Then you can close this thread.

Author: Corresponding AI #2020 added to the list. Resolving this thread.

* [Ledger Dataset Artifact](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UDZCxPqUNEUQt90h8sW-YuhgBsk4pHYcwRlgPJVmwPo/edit?gid=620136225#gid=620136225)

Note the following details in the example datasets:

* The original dataset was delivered before the billing period was closed and includes a charge record that was part of the finalized invoice for May 2025.
* The correction is modeled using Append mechanisms, as the May billing period is closed and invoice immutability must be preserved.
* Correction records have ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating they reallocate cost from a previously closed billing period.
* Original Dataset includes:
  * A charge record attributed entirely to ResourceId `R-111`.
* Delta style correction includes:
  * A decrement record for `R-111`, reducing the cost previously misattributed to that resource.
  * An increment record for `R-222`, assigning the corresponding portion of the cost to the correct resource.
* Ledger style correction includes:
  * A reversal record for the original charge.
  * A corrected record for `R-111`.
  * A corrected record for `R-222`.

### Scenario 2: Closed-Period Correction - Late-arriving Usage

> On July 12th, 2025, ACME Corp identified a cost that was incurred during May 2025 (ChargePeriodStart: `2025-05-01`) but was not included in the finalized invoice issued on June 12th, 2025. Since the May billing period was closed, the correction was delivered in the next open billing period (e.g., June or July).

Reviewer 2: @ijurica 
Scenario 2 says the May period was closed and the correction was delivered in “the next open billing period (e.g., June or July)”, but later the bullets say “assigned to the next open billing period (e.g., June 2025)” while the detection date is July 12th, 2025; if you detected it in July, “next open” would more naturally be July (or August), not June.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. 

In the updated version this is addressed this in the intro section for Closed-Period Correction Scenarios as follows:

> All scenarios in this section relate to a closed billing period for which the corresponding invoices have already been issued. In the example scenarios presented below, this corresponds specifically to the May 2025 billing period, which was closed on June 16th, 2025. All described discrepancies were identified and addressed on July 12th, 2025, at which time the subsequent June 2025 billing period was still open.
> 
> In accordance with the requirements outlined in the Correction Handling attribute, the corresponding corrections are associated with that open billing period (refer to BillingPeriodStart and BillingPeriodEnd), with ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating they reconcile cost or usage from a previously closed billing period, while the charge period (ChargePeriodStart and ChargePeriodEnd) reflects when the cost or usage was originally incurred. This approach ensures a clear temporal separation between closed and open billing cycles, preserving transparency for closed billing periods and enabling traceable corrections in subsequent ones.

The paragraph now specifies:

* All scenarios relate to a closed billing period.
* Specifically, the May 2025 billing period, which was closed on June 16th, 2025.
* All described discrepancies were identified and addressed on July 12th, 2025.
* The associated corrections are linked to the subsequent June 2025 billing period, which was still open at that time (in accordance with the Correction Handling attribute).

This ensures the reader can immediately understand the temporal context of the discrepancies, the closed billing period they relate to, and the open period to which the associated corrections belong, and why.

Reviewer: @caligo-erik Please review and confirm whether we can close.

> On July 12th, 2025, ACME Corp identified a cost that was incurred during May 2025 (ChargePeriodStart: `2025-05-01`) but was not included in the finalized invoice issued on June 12th, 2025. Since the May billing period was closed, the correction was delivered in the next open billing period (e.g., June or July).

Reviewer 3: Do we have actual anecdotes from practioners to validate this? Based my understanding practitioners and AP teams require it to be issued in the original charge period ( or AWS refers to this as Billing Period)

Reviewer: I will take an action to revisit the discussion the Maintainers had on the point of billing periods as applicable to corrections and bring back to TF-1 for further discussion.  Specifically, corrections to closed billing periods.

Author: Please check out [this comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1501/files#r2836409487) in the related PR #1501

Reviewer: Discussed in Feb 24 TF-1.  Closing in favor of the other thread.

CSV Examples:

* [Delta Dataset Artifact](/specification/data/correction-handling-examples/closed-billing-period/scenario_2_late_arriving_usage_delta.csv)
* [Ledger Dataset Artifact](/specification/data/correction-handling-examples/closed-billing-period/scenario_2_late_arriving_usage_ledger.csv)

Note the following details in the example datasets:

* The original dataset was delivered before the billing period was closed.
* The late-arriving cost was incurred during May 2025 but was not captured in the original dataset and was therefore not reflected in the invoice for May 2025, issued on June 8th, 2025.
* The correction introduces a new charge record to account for this previously omitted cost.
* The correction record is assigned to the next open billing period (e.g., June 2025).
* The correction record has ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating it accounts for usage from a previously closed billing period.
* Both Delta style and Ledger style corrections use a single increment record to represent the late-arriving usage and associated cost.

> ### Scenario 3: Closed-Period Correction - Itemized Cost-only Correction

Reviewer: ### Missing Link to Original Dataset (Closed Billing Period)
In `closed_billing_period.md`, under **Scenario 3: Closed-Period Correction - Itemized Cost-only Correction**, you forgot to link the original dataset. 
* **The Issue:** The file `scenario_3_itemized_cost_only_original.csv` is physically included in your diff for the closed billing period, but it's missing from the "CSV Examples" list in the markdown.
* **Fix:** Add `* [Original Dataset Artifact](/specification/data/correction-handling-examples/closed-billing-period/scenario_3_itemized_cost_only_original.csv)` to that list.

Author: Added missing link

Reviewer: Confirmed.  Closing.

* [Accounting-style Correction](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1UDZCxPqUNEUQt90h8sW-YuhgBsk4pHYcwRlgPJVmwPo/edit?gid=620136225#gid=620136225)

Note the following details in the example datasets:

* The original dataset was delivered before the billing period was invoiced.
* The late-arriving cost was incurred during May 2025 but was not captured in the original dataset and was therefore not reflected in the invoice for May 2025, issued on June 12th, 2025.
* The correction introduces a new charge record to account for this previously omitted cost.
* The correction is modeled using append-only mechanisms, as the original billing period is closed and invoice immutability must be preserved.
* The correction record is assigned to the next open billing period (e.g., June 2025).
* The correction record has ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating it accounts for usage from a previously invoiced billing period.
* Both Ledger-style and Accounting-style corrections use a single increment record to represent the late-arriving usage and associated cost.
* Replacement-style correction is not permitted, as modifying finalized records would violate audit and legal constraints.

> ### Scenario 3: Post-Invoice Correction - Itemized Cost-only Correction

Author: **Note to self:** I expanded the example dataset artifact to include a rounding error on two SkuPriceIds instead of one, as it was originally. I need to update the descriptions for Post-Invoice Correction Scenarios 3 and 4 to reflect this change.

Author: addressed and resolving conversation

* The original records were correctly rounded individually, but a minor discrepancy was later identified due to accumulated rounding drift across multiple records related to a single SkuPriceId.
* The discrepancy was not captured in the original dataset and was therefore not reflected in the invoice for May 2025, issued on June 12th, 2025.
* The correction introduces a cost-only record to reconcile the total drift and ensure invoice accuracy.
* The correction is modeled using append-only mechanisms, as the original billing period is closed and invoice immutability must be preserved.
* The correction record is assigned to the next open billing period (e.g., July 2025).
* The correction record has ChargeClass set to "Correction", indicating it reconciles cost discrepancies from a previously invoiced billing period.
* The correction is itemized and explicitly references the relevant SkuPriceId.
* Both Ledger-style and Accounting-style corrections use a single increment record to represent the cost-only adjustment.
* Replacement-style correction is not permitted, as modifying finalized records would violate audit and legal constraints.

> ### Scenario 4: Post-Invoice Correction - Bulk Cost-only Correction

Author: **Note to self:** I expanded the example dataset artifact to include a rounding error on two SkuPriceIds instead of one, as it was originally. I need to update the descriptions for Post-Invoice Correction Scenarios 3 and 4 to reflect this change.

Author: addressed and resolving conversation
